Hello everyone in this lecture will be discussing the stats models Python library the most popular library
or module in Python for dealing with time series data is the stats model's library and it's heavily
inspired by our statistical programming language.
So if you ever done any work with our model is going to feel a little bit familiar to you.
So that's Mallos in general it's just that Python module that allows users to explore data estimates
to models and performs testicle tests and it has an extensive list of descriptive statistics the skill
tests plotting functions and results districts that are all available for different types of data and
each estimator will be focusing on its capabilities with time series data so stat's models already included
in the provided environment file that we recommend you use if you're using some other environment.
You can manually install it using Condon's.
That's models or check out the documentation page that's models.
Or to check out the Pippin's instructions OK.
We're going to explore the documentation and then run through a simple demonstration of what we can
use stat's models for in relation to time series data.
Let's hop over to our browser and get started.
All right so here we are at stat's models start.
And again if you don't use the actual environment that we provide There's installation instructions
right here.
You can just use can install stat's models or Pipp install right here that's models will be working
with the zero point eight point zero release of stat's models.
So you can see here on the main page there some minimal examples of how to use this.
And we'll be working through an example in just a little bit.
And these are the kind of results you get.
It gives you back a pretty detailed regression results for using some sort of statistical test using
stat's models.
If you keep scrolling down here you'll eventually see a citation.
And then the basic documentation link.
So sometimes a little hard to find the documentation because you have scroll down a bit for it but you'll
find the table of contents and we're really going to use focusing on using the time series analysis
modules if you expand this.
You can see time series analysis descriptive tests estimation Armah process time series filters TSA
tools time series analysis et cetera adding trend the composition.
So that's really where we're going to be using stat's models.
There's also some state space models that we'll be showing later on for things like seasonal AREMA.
Okay.
So that's the Table of Contents you can explore that on your own if you want to just see some straight
up examples you can click here on this tab or it says examples and then you can go to the topics that
interest you.
For example time series analysis they'll scroll down here you see a time series analysis there's autocorrelation
partial autocorrelation plots or sunspots data.
You click on that.
It'll bring you to the actual page.
We have the example and luckily the examples are formatted like Egypt or notebooks you can easily take
this and run with it on your own Jupiter notebook.
So you can see how some plotting capabilities it works really well.
Pandurs if autocorrelation and partial correlation charts and will actually cover these and this section
of the course and it just shows a basic example of modeling some sunspot activity I believe.
All right.
So let's go ahead and jump over to our own Jupiter notebook and get started if a simple example.
So in your Python for finance repo you should see time series analysis as a section will be working
with this introduction to stat's models.
So here's the introduction that's models.
There's a nice explanation of everything we're going to be doing.
Since I'm actually going to work through this I will just start a new notebook here so I'll start a
new notebook.
And the first thing to do is a couple of imports so I'm going to start off by importing pandas as PD
or import map plot lib pipe plot as PLDT and I will say map plots live in line and then just in case
I need it I don't believe we'll use it but I'll import some pie as and P.
So this is the imports that we've been using throughout this course and we're going to do is import
stat's models that API as S.M. and this is typically how you import stats models.
Now if you're running this you may get a small warning.
It may say something like Hey panel is that court date tools model module is going to be removed in
a future version.
You don't really have to worry about that right now if everything's on the same versions as the environment
file we provide.
So this is just a warning.
It's not an error.
Again you can pretty much ignore this.
In fact if you run this line again you won't see the error or that warning anymore.
So we're going to do is actually grab a data set from stat's models.
It actually comes up a couple of data sets.
And the way you access them is you say S-M dot data sets and used have to autocomplete here.
And then there's Well if hit tab here there's various datasets you can use.
We're going to be using the macro data.
And then there's various things you can do if it were going to be using the load underscore panderers
we call that method and then call data off of it.
Now we're going to set this whole thing equal to death.
Now this is definitely not a very intuitive way to grab this data.
Took me a couple of tries to realize that you had to call this data attribute.
After calling load Pandurs maybe they'll get a fix in the future.
I don't think so much into the way but you know that's how we can get the data.
So if I check out my data from now I get back this I have a year or a quarter some real GDP values and
then various other things.
So this is just some basic government data and if you want the actual description for it we can do is
say print out S-M dot data sets that macro data and then in all caps the notes attribute and then this
actually reports back what it actually is about.
So it's just some real gross domestic property.
And I believe that all United States data.
So things like quarterly monthly average of the monthly three month Treasury bill and the quarter consumer
price index or just economic data for the United States.
All right.
So we're going to continue down here.
And what we're going to do is check out the head of our data frame again.
So we see we have these various columns and we'll see that we have a year.
So notice that we can actually set the year to be a time series index instead of being a column.
So let's go ahead and do that.
There's various ways we can do that one way we can do is actually using stat's models own time series
analysis tools.
So we'll show you how to do that.
In reality we'll probably use the panel's tools we're already familiar with but I just want to show
you that stat's models does have the capability for this so you don't need to worry about memorizing
this but I'll show you what it's capable of will say stat's models are S-M TSA that is time series analysis.
And then there's date tools off of that and then there's a variety of methods you can call and the method
we're going to be doing is saying date from range and then we can report here is just a starting date
and an ending date.
And this can actually taken a date strings.
So there are certain parameters there's more examples here.
You can see you can take a string in the form of like 1960 M1 meaning the first month 1960.
So we can actually pass this a string something that says something like 1959 and I will say q one for
quarter one because that's what we're starting.
So 1959 quarter 1 is where we're starting.
And then the end of it let's get the tail of this is 2009 quarter of theories.
Let's go ahead and put that in we'll say 2009.
Q 3 so this sort of functionality is not something you can get with panels directly pand those you'd
have to actually tell it the format of this type of string order for it to read correctly that's models
can be a little more flexible.
But then again you are calling quite a bit of attributes and methods offsets models to get to this functionality.
So we don't use this sort of thing that often.
Just keep in mind that it is available for you.
So out of this whole thing we're going to create index out of this by just saying PD the index and pass
that whole thing into an index.
And if we just see the result of this we get this date time index where it's kind of like a quarterly
index and we'll make this just be a variable called index.
So then what I'm going to do is call my data from index and set it equal to index so that if I check
out the head of my data.
So now we can see here we have 1959 Jame for a March 30 first and that's the end of the first quarter
of 1959.
So that's what our data looks like now and we're going to do is a little bit of analysis on it so we
can just take something like the real GDP and I can plot this says is the real GDP from 1959 all the
way to 2009.
You can see just steadily increasing increasing for United States.
So we're going to do is we're going to use that as models to get the trend and we're going to use something
called the hot drink Prescott filter.
And what it does is it separates a time series of white teeth into a trend tau and a cyclical component
Zaida.
So you can see the formula if you go over to introduction is that's models and scroll down here the
actual formula for this sort of filter is right here really don't need to worry about this formula.
This is just an example of what's possible that's models.
We won't really be doing this kind of thing that often.
So we'll come back to our notebook and kind of program it out.
So we call S-M TSA filters that you can see that there's a list of filters here.
So we're going to be using H-P filter for that Heidrich Prescott filter.
And then we're just going to pass in the real GDP column so real GDP.
So what this actually returns is a tuple so we can set this as result and then see the type of results.
And it's a tuple where the items in the tuple for Take a look at results zero.
This happens to be a series and if we take a look at the second item that's also a series and that should
be if we take a look at another item for that there's nothing there.
So it's just a tuple of two items.
And if you take a look at the documentation and read more about this filter what ends up returning if
you expand this it returns back cycle and trend.
So it's the estimated cycle and the data and the estimated trend and the data.
So the easiest one to understand is the trend which is just the general trend line of this data.
So it's pretty obvious from this sort of time scale that the trend tends to be upward.
So we're going to do is use tuple in packing to actually grab that trend off of this and then we'll
plot it on top of that so we will say the following.
We'll use tuple unpacking here will say GTP underscore cycle comma and then GDP underscore trend and
set that equal to that filter.
And then we're going to do.
This is actually add in a column for the trend.
So we'll say DSF trends value is equal to GDP underscore trend.
And then I'm going to plot not just the real GDP but it will also be plotting that trend that we just
calculated using that filter and don't worry about how the filter works or how it actually returns back.
These two series objects we don't really need to concern ourselves with that.
I'm just showing you what's possible of stat's models.
So now we run this and we get this nice little trend line so we can see here that the basic Ora's trend
is kind of modeling the trend and then we see the real GDP value at this scale.
It's not super obvious what's happening here.
So it's actually kind of zoom in so I can zoom in just by doing another set of brackets here or indexing
will star.
Let's just say we'll start from 2000.
We'll start from the first quarter of 2000 so we'll say 2000 0 3 31 coal and all the way to the end.
Plot that.
And now the trend line becomes a lot clearer.
So we see this real GDP value and then we see that trend component that we calculated using that filter.
That's kind of what stat's models can do.
It has a ton of mathematical statistical tests and filters that are built in.
And then once you understand those filters you can calculate them and use them easily.
That's models so you can see here in just a few lines we did a lot of heavy math to get that trend.
Now we're actually going to be kind of breaking this sort of thing down and doing it step by step and
then later on the course will kind of call these convenient filters for analyzing time series data.
All right I hope you felt that stat's models is a really powerful tool and we're going to do is keep
exploring it throughout this section of the course.
Thanks everyone.
I'll see you at the next lecture.